# `npd`

A CLI tool to generate reports of the differences in build outcomes between pairs of [Nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs) commits.

> [!WARNING]
> `npd` is not quite out of the prototyping phase yet. Expect breaking changes until this warning is removed.

For example, the following report was generated by running this command:

```sh
npd --pr 542936
```

That command may not give you the same result if you run it yourself, but `npd`'s report includes a _reproducible_ command that will:

> ## [`npd`](README.md) · [`dce745c`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/dce745ce155ce35a8121ee7280e7ae53559cead3) → [`5f96e8f`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/5f96e8fa57f8703504fe54b642bfcb4264aa9d4d)
>
> <details><summary>Expand this for a reproducible command.</summary>
>
> ```sh
> npd --base dce745ce155ce35a8121ee7280e7ae53559cead3 --head 840dbf16cf78ddd86383d55a3beefa44df86cfd9 --patch 840dbf16cf78ddd86383d55a3beefa44df86cfd9...5f96e8fa57f8703504fe54b642bfcb4264aa9d4d -s x86_64-linux
> ```
>
> </details>
>
> <details><summary>Expand this for a legend of all symbols below.</summary>
>
> - ✅ = successfully built
> - ❌ = failed to build
> - 🚫 = dependency failed to build
> - ⏩ = didn't try to build
> - ❔ = couldn't try to build
> - ➖ = doesn't exist
> </details>
>
> ### `x86_64-linux`
>
> <details><summary>✅ → ❌ · 1 package</summary>
>
> - `coqPackages.graph-theory`
> </details>
>
> <details><summary>✅ → 🚫 · 8 packages (5 unique)</summary>
>
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-analysis-stdlib` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-analysis-stdlib`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-analysis` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-analysis`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-experimental-reals` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-experimental-reals`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-infotheo`
> - `coqPackages.ssprove`
> </details>
>
> <details><summary>✅ → ➖ · 1 package</summary>
>
> - `rocqPackages.mathcomp-real-closed`
> </details>
>
> <details><summary>✅ → ✅ · 17 packages (13 unique)</summary>
>
> - `coqPackages.coqeal`
> - `coqPackages.fourcolor`
> - `coqPackages.gaia`
> - `coqPackages.libvalidsdp`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-classical` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-classical`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-finmap` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-finmap`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-real-closed`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-reals-stdlib` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-reals-stdlib`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-reals` = `rocqPackages.mathcomp-reals`
> - `coqPackages.mathcomp-tarjan`
> - `coqPackages.multinomials`
> - `coqPackages.odd-order`
> - `coqPackages.validsdp`
> </details>

---

<!-- toc -->

- [Goals](#goals)
- [Non-goals](#non-goals)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Temporary](#temporary)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [`-h`, `--help`](#-h---help)
  - [`-C`](#-c)
  - [`--base`](#--base)
  - [`--head`](#--head)
  - [`--pr`](#--pr)
  - [`--patch`](#--patch)
  - [`--no-merge`](#--no-merge)
  - [`--no-tests`](#--no-tests)
  - [`--no-skip`](#--no-skip)
  - [`--retry`](#--retry)
  - [`-s`, `--system`](#-s---system)
  - [`--clean`](#--clean)
  - [`-V`, `--version`](#-v---version)
- [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
- [License](#license)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Goals

`npd` strives to be

- **causal.** Derivations are built on both sides of the change, so the report makes it clear which failures are regressions and which were preexisting.

- **thorough.** By default, the tool finds and runs tests associated with the affected packages, and includes those test outcomes in the report.

- **cached.** It takes a nontrivial amount of time to run Nix evaluations and failing builds, so the tool caches these; re-runs should always take less than one second.

- **efficient.** Caching is not an excuse to be slow the first time, so on a cold run, the tool automatically chooses a point along the Pareto frontier to parallelize according to how much RAM is available.

- **reproducible.** Often a change may be on a branch that gets force-pushed later, or there may be uncommitted local changes, so the report always includes a command to reproduce the exact same Git tree on both sides.

- **friendly.** Users running the tool in a rich terminal should get nice colors and live progress indicators, and users running it over a pipe should get lean but informative progress lines.

## Non-goals

`npd` does _not_

- fetch remote evaluations.
- manage Git worktrees.
- provide sandboxing.
- post to GitHub.

## Installation

### Temporary

This repository provides a [Nix flake](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Flakes), so if you have flakes enabled, the quickest way to use it is via the [`nix shell`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/command-ref/new-cli/nix3-env-shell.html) command:

```sh
nix shell github:samestep/npd
```

This starts a shell within your shell which has `npd` available on the `PATH`.

## Usage

### `-h`, `--help`

To list available CLI arguments:

```sh
npd --help
```

### `-C`

By default, `npd` assumes the current working directory is a clone of the Nixpkgs repo. If your Nixpkgs clone is somewhere else:

```sh
npd -C ~/github/NixOS/nixpkgs
```

Note that, just like [Git's `-C`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git#Documentation/git.txt--Cpath), this argument affects how other paths are interpreted, specifically for `--patch`.

### `--base`

By default, `npd` compares against `master`. To compare against a different base:

```sh
npd --base release-26.05
```

### `--head`

By default, `npd` evaluates on the current working tree. To evaluate on a different revision:

```sh
npd --head some-branch
```

### `--pr`

To set `--base` and `--head` from the current state of an open pull request:

```sh
npd --pr 543008
```

Note that this is an exception to `npd`'s usual rule that a re-run should be fully cached. If you run `npd` with a `--pr` argument, then that PR is updated, and you run the same `npd` command again, it will fetch the current state of the PR every time.

### `--patch`

To apply a diff on top of the `--head`, provide a path to a patch file. For instance, one trick that `npd` sometimes uses to provide reproducible commands is `--patch /dev/stdin` with a [heredoc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Here_document):

```sh
npd --patch /dev/stdin <<'PATCH'
--- a/pkgs/by-name/he/hello/package.nix
+++ b/pkgs/by-name/he/hello/package.nix
@@ -66,3 +66,3 @@ stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs: {
     mainProgram = "hello";
-    platforms = lib.platforms.all;
+    platforms = [ ]; # bye bye
     identifiers.cpeParts.vendor = "gnu";
PATCH
```

Note that the path must include a forward-slash. That is to avoid ambiguity because `--patch` also accepts three-dot [GitHub commit comparison](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/how-tos/commit-changes/comparing-commits) expressions:

```sh
npd --patch HEAD...974b2de7dc8f59ba4ac9729c452834641f82849f
```

### `--no-merge`

### `--no-tests`

### `--no-skip`

### `--retry`

### `-s`, `--system`

### `--clean`

### `-V`, `--version`

To print the version:

```sh
npd --version
```

## Acknowledgments

This project owes its existence to its primary inspiration, Jörg Thalheim's [nixpkgs-review](https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review), which serves a similar purpose but makes different design tradeoffs.

The development of this project was AI-assisted. This README and `npd --help` contain no AI-generated text.

## License

`npd` is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
